.. include:: /Includes.rst.txt

==========================================================
Adding additional tag attributes with additionalAttributes
==========================================================

Most of the ViewHelpers can be split into two types: One
group of ViewHelpers is somewhat functional oriented. For example,
that applies to the `format` Viewhelpers, which can format data or currencies.
The other group is mostly output-oriented because these Viewhelpers output
mostly an HTML tag. Samples of this are the form Viewhelpers. All of them
start with `f:form`. Every form Viewhelper generates a HTML tag,
like e.g. `<form>` or `<input>`.

A Fluid Viewhelper supports most attributes that are also available in
HTML. There are, for example, the attributes `class` and
`id`, which exists in all tag-based Viewhelper. You find a listing
of all universal properties in appendix C.

However, sometimes attributes are needed that are not provided by the
Viewhelper - maybe a special JavaScript event handler or proprietary
attributes (which are used by JavaScript frameworks like Dojo, for example).
To output them as well without changing the Viewhelper, the attribute
`additionalAttributes` is available. This is an associative array
by which additional tag attributes can be defined, like the following
example shows::

   <f:form.textbox id="myTextbox" additionalAttributes="{onclick: 'alert(\'Hello World\')'}" />

Another common use case is the data-attribute, which can be used in JavaScript functions::

   <f:form.textbox additionalAttributes="{data-anything: 'some info'}" />

The HTML tag generated by the Viewhelper now also supports the
`onclick` attribute::

   <input type="text" onClick="alert('Hello World')" id="myTextbox" />

The `additionalAttributes` is especially helpful if only a
few of these additional attributes are needed. Otherwise, it is often
reasonable to write an own Viewhelper which extends the corresponding
Viewhelper.

`additionalAttributes` is provided by the `TagBasedViewHelper`, the
base class for tag-based Viewhelpers (see appendix C), and it allows
the adding of optional attributes for the HTML tag output.
